
Advanced Features {#sec:advanced-features}
=================

We now turn to some of Tamarin's more advanced features.
We cover custom heuristics, the GUI, channel models, induction, internal
preprocessor, and how to measure the time needed for proofs.
<!--manual proofs,encoding tricks,-->

Heuristics {#sec:heuristics}
----------

A heuristic describes a method to rank the open goals of a constraint system and is specified as a sequence of goal rankings.
Each goal ranking is abbreviated by a single character from the set `{s,S,c,C,i,I,o,O}`.

A global heuristic for a protocol file can be defined using the `heuristic:` statement followed by the sequence of goal rankings.
The heuristic which is used for a particular lemma can be overwritten using the `heuristic` lemma attribute.
Finally, the heuristic can be specified using the `--heuristic` command line option.

\pagebreak

The precedence of heuristics is:

1. Command line option (`--heuristic`)
2. Lemma attribute (`heuristic=`)
3. Global (`heuristic:`)
4. Default (`s`)

The goal rankings are as follows.

`s`:
: the 'smart' ranking is the ranking described in the extended version of
  our CSF'12 paper. It is the default ranking and works very well in a wide
  range of situations. Roughly, this ranking prioritizes chain goals,
  disjunctions, facts, actions, and adversary knowledge of private and
  fresh terms in that order (e.g., every action will be solved before any
  knowledge goal). Goals marked 'Probably Constructable' and
  'Currently Deducible' in the GUI are lower priority.

`S`:
: is like the 'smart' ranking, but does not delay the solving of premises
  marked as loop-breakers. What premises are loop breakers is determined
  from the protocol using a simple under-approximation to the vertex
  feedback set of the conclusion-may-unify-to-premise graph. We require
  these loop-breakers for example to guarantee the termination of the case
  distinction precomputation. You can inspect which premises are marked as
  loop breakers in the 'Multiset rewriting rules' page in the GUI.

`c`:
: is the 'consecutive' or 'conservative' ranking. It solves goals in the
  order they occur in the constraint system. This guarantees that no goal
  is delayed indefinitely, but often leads to large proofs because some
  of the early goals are not worth solving.

`C`:
: is like 'c' but without delaying loop breakers.

`i`: 
: is a ranking developed to be well-suited to injective stateful protocols.
  The priority of goals is similar to the 'S' ranking, but instead of a
  strict priority hierarchy, the fact, action, and knowledge goals are
  considered equal priority and solved by their age. This is useful for
  stateful protocols with an unbounded number of runs, in which for example
  solving a fact goal may create a new fact goal for the previous protocol
  run. This ranking will prioritize existing fact, action, and knowledge goals
  before following up on the fact goal of that previous run. In contrast the 'S'
  ranking would prioritize this new fact goal ahead of any existing action or
  knowledge goal, although solving the new goal may create yet another 
  earlier fact goal and so on, preventing termination.

`I`:
: is like 'i' but without delaying loop breakers.
  
`o`:
: is the oracle ranking. It allows the user to provide an arbitrary program
  that runs independently of Tamarin and ranks the proof goals.
  The path of the program can be specified after the goal ranking, e.g., `o "oracles/oracle-default"`
  to use the program `oracles/oracle-default` as the oracle.
  If no path is specified, the default is `oracle`.
  The path of the program is relative to the directory of the protocol file containing the goal ranking.
  If the heuristic is specified using the `--heuristic` option, the path can be given using the
  `--oraclename` command line option. In this case, the path is relative to the current working directory.
  The oracle's input is a numbered list
  of proof goals, given in the 'Consecutive' ranking (as generated by the heuristic `C`).
  Every line of the input is a new goal and starts with "%i: ", where %i is the
  index of the goal. The oracle's output is expected to be a line-separated list of
  indices, prioritizing the given proof goals. Note that it suffices to output
  the index of a single proof goal, as the first ranked goal will always be selected.
  Moreover, the oracle is also allowed to terminate without printing a valid index.
  In this case, the first goal of the 'Consecutive' ranking will be selected.

`O`:
: is the oracle ranking based on the 'smart' heuristic `s`. It works the same as `o` but uses 'smart' instead of 'Consecutive' ranking to start with.

`{.}`:
: is the tactic ranking. As for the oracle ranking, it allows the user to provide an arbitrary ranking for the proof goals. The difference with the oracle is that the ranking is specified in a language native to Tamarin. Each tactic needs to be given a name. For the tactic named `default`, the call would be `{default}`. 
The syntax of the tactics will be detailed below in the part `Using a tactic`. However, for a quick overview, a tactic is composed of several fields. The first one, `tactic`, specifies the name of the tactic and is mandatory. Then `presort` (optional) allows the user to choose the based ranking of the input. The keywords `prio` and `deprio` defines the ranks of the goals. They gather functions that will recognize the goals. The higher the prio that recognize a goal, the sooner it will be treated and the lower the deprio, the later. The user can choose to write as much of prio or deprio as needed. A tactic can also be composed of only prio or deprio. The functions are preimplemented and allow to reach information unavailable from oracle (the state of the system or the proof context).


If several rankings are given for the heuristic flag, then they are employed
in a round-robin fashion depending on the proof-depth. For example, a flag
`--heuristic=ssC` always uses two times the smart ranking and then once the
'Consecutive' goal ranking. The idea is that you can mix goal rankings easily
in this way.

Fact annotations {#sec:fact-annotations}
-------------------

Facts can be annotated with `+` or `-` to influence their priority in heuristics.
Annotating a fact with `+` causes the tool to solve instances of that fact
earlier than normal, while annotating a fact with `-` will delay solving those
instances.
A fact can be annotated by suffixing it with the annotation in square
brackets. For example, a fact `F(x)[+]` will be prioritized, while a fact
`G(x)[-]` will be delayed.

Fact annotations
apply only to the instances that are annotated, and are not considered during
unification. For example, a rule premise containing `A(x)[+]` can unify
with a rule conclusion containing `A(x)`. This allows multiple instances
of the same fact to be solved with different priorities by annotating them
differently.

The `+` and `-` annotations can also be used to prioritize actions.
For example, A reusable lemma of the form
```
    "All x #i #j. A(x) @ i ==> B(x)[+] @ j"
```
will cause the `B(x)[+]` actions created when applying this lemma
to be solved with higher priority.

Heuristic priority can also be influenced by starting a fact name with `F_`
(for first) or `L_` (for last) corresponding to the `+` and `-` annotations
respectively. Note however that these prefixes must apply to every instance
of the fact, as a fact `F_A(x)` cannot unify with a fact `A(x)`.

Facts in rule premises can also be annotated with `no_precomp` to prevent the
tool from precomputing their sources.
Use of the `no_precomp` annotation in key places can be very
useful for reducing the precomputation time required to load large models, however
it should be used sparingly. Preventing the precomputation of sources for a premise
that is solved frequently will typically slow down the tool, as it must solve the
premise each time instead of directly applying precomputed sources. Note also that
using this annotation may cause partial deconstructions if the source of a premise
was necessary to compute a full deconstruction.

The `no_precomp` annotation can be used in combination with heuristic annotations
by including both separated by commas---e.g., a premise
`A(x)[-,no_precomp]` will be delayed and also will not have its sources precomputed.


### Using an Oracle

Oracles allow to implement user-defined heuristics as custom rankings of proof
goals. They are invoked as a process with the lemma under scrutiny as the first
argument and all current proof goals seperated by EOL over stdin. Proof goals
match the regex `(\d+):(.+)` where `(\d+)` is the goal's index, and `(.+)` is
the actual goal. A proof goal is formatted like one of the applicable proof
methods shown in the interactive view, but without **solve(...)** surrounding
it. One can also observe the input to the oracle in the stdout of tamarin
itself. Oracle calls are logged between `START INPUT`, `START OUTPUT`, and
`END Oracle call`.

The oracle can set the new order of proof goals by writing the proof indices to
stdout, separated by EOL. The order of the indices determines the new order of
proof goals. An oracle does not need to rank all goals. Unranked goals will be
ranked with lower priority than ranked goals but kept in order. For example, if
an oracle was given the goals 1-4, and would output:
```
4
2
```
the new ranking would be 4, 2, 1, 3. In particular, this implies that an oracle
which does not output anything, behaves like the identity function on the
ranking.

Next, we present a small example to demonstrate how an oracle can be used to generate
efficient proofs.

Assume we want to prove the uniqueness of a pair `<xcomplicated,xsimple>`, where
`xcomplicated` is a term that is derived via a complicated and long way (not guaranteed to be unique)
and `xsimple` is a unique term generated via a very simple way.
The built-in heuristics cannot easily detect that the straightforward way to prove uniqueness is
to solve for the term `xsimple`.
By providing an oracle, we can generate a very short and efficient proof nevertheless.

Assume the following theory.
```
theory SourceOfUniqueness begin

heuristic: o "myoracle"

builtins: symmetric-encryption

rule generatecomplicated:
 [ In(x), Fr(~key)  ]
 --[ Complicated(x) ]->
 [ Out(senc(x,~key)), ReceiverKeyComplicated(~key) ]

rule generatesimple:
 [ Fr(~xsimple), Fr(~key)  ]
 --[ Simpleunique(~xsimple) ]->
 [ Out(senc(~xsimple,~key)), ReceiverKeySimple(~key) ]

rule receive:
 [ ReceiverKeyComplicated(keycomplicated), In(senc(xcomplicated,keycomplicated))
 , ReceiverKeySimple(keysimple), In(senc(xsimple,keysimple))
 ]
 --[ Unique(<xcomplicated,xsimple>) ]->
 [  ]
 
//this restriction artificially complicates an occurrence of an event Complicated(x)
restriction complicate:
 "All x #i. Complicated(x)@i
   ==> (Ex y #j. Complicated(y)@j & #j < #i) | (Ex y #j. Simpleunique(y)@j & #j < #i)"
 
lemma uniqueness:
 "All #i #j x. Unique(x)@i & Unique(x)@j ==> #i=#j"

end

```

We use the following oracle to generate an efficient proof.

```
#!/usr/bin/env python

from __future__ import print_function
import sys

lines = sys.stdin.readlines()

l1 = []
l2 = []
l3 = []
l4 = []
lemma = sys.argv[1]

for line in lines:
  num = line.split(':')[0]

  if lemma == "uniqueness":
      if ": ReceiverKeySimple" in line:
        l1.append(num)
      elif "senc(xsimple" in line or "senc(~xsimple" in line:
        l2.append(num)
      elif "KU( ~key" in line:
        l3.append(num)
      else:
        l4.append(num)

  else:
    exit(0)

ranked = l1 + l2 + l3 + l4

for i in ranked:
  print(i)
```

Having saved the Tamarin theory in the file `SourceOfUniqueness.spthy`
and the oracle in the file `myoracle`, we can prove the lemma `uniqueness`, using the following command.
```
tamarin-prover --prove=uniqueness SourceOfUniqueness.spthy
```

The generated proof consists of only 10 steps.
(162 steps with 'consecutive' ranking, non-termination with 'smart' ranking).

### Using a Tactic {subsec: tactic}

As the oracles, the tactics allow to write user-defined heuristics as custom rankings of proof goals. However, they have been designed with the objective of offering a language native of Tamarin for an easier use. Moreover, their integration in the tool gives them access to more information than given to the oracle scripts, such as the state of the system and the proof context at the time of the call of the heuristic.


#### Writing a tactic

In order to explain the way a tactic should be written, we will use the same example as in above (theory SourceOfUniqueness). 
The first step is to identify the tactic by giving it a name (here uniqueness). Then you can choose a `presort`. It has the same role as the c or C option but with more options. Depending on whether you are using the diff mode are not, you will respectively be able to choose among 's', 'S', 'c' and 'C' and 'C', 'I', 'P', 'S', 'c', 'i', 'p', 's'. Here, we have chosen to go with C since it will have the same pretreatment as the `o` option for the oracle. Note however that this field is optional and will by default be set at `s`.

```
tactic: uniqueness
presort: C
```

Then we will start to write the priorities following which we want to order the goals. When trying to mimicing an oracle, one can use the regex function since it will compare the pretty printing of the ranked goals to the string passed as parameter. Therefore, the previous oracle can be rewritten as follows:
```
prio:
    regex "ReceiverKeySimple"
prio: 
    regex "senc\(xsimple" | regex "senc\(~xsimple"
prio:
    regex "KU\( ~key"
```
The different `prio` keywords marks the separation between two 'order' of priority. It could be compared to l1 to l3 in the oracle. As can be noticed for the second priority, the `or` in the python script has been replaced by `|`. The tactic language authorizes to combine functions using `|`, `&` and `not`. The higher the priority in the tactic, the higher the goals it recognizes will be ranked. We just skip the last priority since every goal not matched by any function will automatically be ranked after the prioritized ones. 
Even if the option is not necessary for the proof of the lemma uniqueness, let's now explore the `deprio` keyword. It works as the `prio` one but with the opposite goal since it allows the user to put the recognized goals at the bottom of the ranking. In case several `deprio` are written, the first one will be ranked higher than the last ones. If a goal is recognized by two or more 'priorities' or 'depriorities', only the first one (ie the higher rank possible) will be taken into account for the final ranking.

#### Calling a tactic

As the other heuristics, tactics can be called two ways. The first one is using the command line. In the case study above, it would be: `tamarin-prover --prove --heuristic={prove=uniqueness} SourceOfUniqueness.spthy`.
The other way is directly integrated in the file by adding `[heuristic={uniqueness}]` next to the name of the lemma that is supposed to use it. The option won't need to be called again from the command line. The second function has been proven very helpful when working with a file containing several tactics used by different lemmas since it allows to run all proofs at once.

#### Ranking functions

As explained above, the functions used in the tactic language have already been implemented in Tamarin. For now, here is a list of the toolkit we have put in place. At the end at this section, you will however find an explanation on how to write your own functions if the one described here do not suffice for your usage.

Pre-implemented functions
    * `regex`: as explain above, this function takes in parameter a string and will use it as a pattern to match against the goals. (Since it is based on the Text.Regex.PCRE module of Haskell, some characters, as the parenthesis, will need to be escaped to achieve the desired behavior).
    * `isFactName`: as is given by its name, this function will go look in the Tamarin object 'goal' and check if the field FactName matches its parameter. To give an example of its usage, `isFactName` could be used instead of `regex` for the first prio of the above example with same results.
    * `isInFactTerms`: the function will look in the list contained in the field FactTest whether an element corresponding the parameter can be found.
The following functions are also preimplemented but specifically designed to translate the oracles of the Vacarme tool in tactic:
    * `dhreNoise`: recognize the goals containing a Diffie-Hellman exponentiation. The content of the exposant to be recognized is based on the state of the system at the call of the tactic. Its only parameter is the type of oracle it is called with (it can be "curve" for oracle_C25519_K1X1.py or "diff" for oracle_diff.py). In case anything else is specified, the default mode (for oracle.py) will be used.
    * `defaultNoise`: this function takes two parameters. The first one is a pattern, the second is the type of oracle we are translating, as explained above. This function is meant to retrieve to check that the Diffie-Hellman exponentiation happening in the considered goal (retieved thanks to the pattern) are present in a list derived from the system state. In order to fully detect the "default" goals, it should be used in combination with `not regex "^!KU\("`.
    * `reasonableNoncesNoise`: this function takes one argument (the same as dhreNoise). It extracts from the system state a list of pattern and then checks if the fact terms of the goal considered is one of them. 
    * `nonAbsurdGoal`: this function retrieve the functions names present in the goal and verifies if they are "Ku" or "inv". It also retrieves a list of pattern form the system state and checks if they do not appear in the goal. If both the conditions are verified, the goal is recognized. It only takes one argument (the same as dhreNoise)


Now here is a brief tour on how to write your own function. The functions will need to be written in the tacticFunctions function in the lib/theory/src/Theory/Text/Parser/Tactics.hs file. The implementation has been designed to be modular so adding new functions should be easy and not compromise what is already working. The first step is to record the function in the repertory, the name in quote will be the one used by the user in the tactic, the other, the one used for the implementation. They can be different if necessary. The "user function name" also need to be added to the nameToFunction list, along with a quick description for the error message.
Regarding the implementation of the function, the first thing to know is that every function you write will take two parameters. The first one is the list of strings that the user may pass to the function (the pattern for regex for example). Nothing forbids the user to write as many parameters as he wants, we will however only use the first ones we need. The second parameter is a triplet composed of the goal being tested, the proof context and the system. The function then needs to return a boolean, `True` if the goal, proof context or system have been recognized, `False` if not. 
To be considered, the code then needs to be recompiled, using `make`. The new function is now ready to be used.


<!--Advanced Encoding
----------------------------

to encoding using alternative more efficient descriptions-->

Manual Exploration using GUI
----------------------------

See Section [Example](003_example.html#sec:gui) for a short demonstration
of the main features of the GUI.

<!-- downloading proofs, keyboard commands (a vs A vs b vs B) etc. -->

Different Channel Models {#sec:channel-models}
------------------------

Tamarin's built-in adversary model is often referred to as
the  Dolev-Yao adversary.  This models an active adversary that has
complete control of the communication network.  Hence
this adversary can eavesdrop on, block, and
modify messages sent over the network and can actively inject messages
into the network.  The injected messages though must be those
that the adversary can construct from his knowledge, i.e., the messages
he initially knew, the messages he has learned from observing network traffic,
and the messages that he can construct from messages he knows.

The adversary's control over the communication network is
modeled with the following two built-in rules:

1.  
```
rule irecv:
   [ Out( x ) ] --> [ !KD( x ) ]
```

2.  
```
rule isend:
   [ !KU( x ) ] --[ K( x ) ]-> [ In( x ) ]
```

The `irecv` rule states that any message sent by an agent using the
`Out` fact is learned by the adversary. Such messages are then
analyzed with the adversary's message deduction rules, which depend on
the specified equational theory.

The `isend` rule states that any message received by
an agent by means of the `In` fact has been constructed by the
adversary.

We can limit the adversary's control over the protocol agents'
communication channels by specifying channel rules, which model channels
with intrinsic security properties.
In the following,
we illustrate the modelling of confidential, authentic, and secure
channels. Consider for this purpose the following protocol, where an initiator generates a 
fresh nonce and sends it to a receiver.

~~~~ {.tamarin slice="code/ChannelExample.spthy" lower=5 upper=6}
~~~~

We can model this protocol as follows.

~~~~ {.tamarin slice="code/ChannelExample.spthy" lower=10 upper=31}
~~~~

We state the nonce secrecy property for the 
initiator and responder with the `nonce_secret_initiator` and the
`nonce_secret_receiver` lemma, respectively. The lemma
`message_authentication` specifies a [message
authentication](007_property-specification.html#sec:message-authentication)
property for the responder role. 

If we analyze the protocol with insecure channels, none of the
properties hold because the adversary can learn the nonce sent by the
initiator and send his own one to the receiver.

#### Confidential Channel Rules

Let us now modify the protocol such that the same message is sent over a
confidential channel. By confidential we mean that only the intended receiver
can read the message but everyone, including the adversary, can send a message
on this channel.

~~~~ {.tamarin slice="code/ChannelExample_conf.spthy" lower=11 upper=38}
~~~~

The first three rules denote the channel rules for a confidential channel.
They specify that whenever a message `x` is sent on a confidential channel 
from `$A` to `$B`, a fact `!Conf($B,x)` can be derived. This fact binds the 
receiver `$B` to the  message `x`, because only he will be able to read
the message. The rule `ChanIn_C` models that at the incoming end of a
confidential channel, there must be a `!Conf($B,x)` fact, but any apparent
sender `$A` from the adversary knowledge can be added. This models 
that a confidential channel is not authentic, and anybody could have sent the message.

Note that `!Conf($B,x)` is a persistent fact. With this, we model that a
message that was sent confidentially to `$B` can be replayed by the adversary at
a later point in time.
The last rule, `ChanIn_CAdv`, denotes that the adversary can also directly
send a message from his knowledge on a confidential channel.

Finally, we need to give protocol rules specifying that the message `~n` is
sent and received on a confidential channel. We do this by changing the `Out` 
and `In` facts to the `Out_C` and `In_C` facts, respectively.

In this modified protocol, the lemma `nonce_secret_initiator` holds. 
As the initiator sends the nonce on a confidential channel, only the intended
receiver can read the message, and the adversary cannot learn it.

#### Authentic Channel Rules

Unlike a confidential channel, an adversary can read messages sent on an
authentic channel. However, on an authentic channel, the adversary cannot
modify the messages or their sender.
We modify the protocol again to use an authentic channel for sending the 
message.

~~~~ {.tamarin slice="code/ChannelExample_auth.spthy" lower=11 upper=33}
~~~~

The first channel rule binds a sender `$A` to a message `x` by the 
fact `!Auth($A,x)`. Additionally, the rule produces an `Out` fact that models
that the adversary can learn everything sent on an authentic channel.
The second rule says that whenever there is a fact `!Auth($A,x)`, the message
can be sent to any receiver `$B`. This fact is again persistent, which means 
that the adversary can replay it multiple times, possibly to different 
receivers.

Again, if we want the nonce in the protocol to be sent over the authentic 
channel, the corresponding `Out` and `In` facts in the protocol rules must
be changed to `Out_A` and `In_A`, respectively.
In the resulting protocol, the lemma `message_authentication` is proven 
by Tamarin. The adversary can neither change the sender of the message nor 
the message itself. For this reason, the receiver can be sure that the agent in 
the initiator role indeed sent it.

#### Secure Channel Rules

The final kind of channel that we consider in detail are secure 
channels. Secure channels have the property of being both
confidential and authentic. Hence
an adversary can neither modify nor learn messages that are sent over a
secure channel.
However, an adversary can store a message sent over a secure channel for replay
at a later point in time.

The protocol to send the messages over a secure channel can be modeled as
follows.

~~~~ {.tamarin slice="code/ChannelExample_sec.spthy" lower=11 upper=33}
~~~~

The channel rules bind both the sender `$A` and the receiver `$B` to the
message `x` by the fact `!Sec($A,$B,x)`, which cannot be modified by the 
adversary.
As `!Sec($A,$B,x)` is a persistent fact, it can be reused several times as the
premise of the rule `ChanIn_S`. This models that an adversary can replay
such a message block arbitrary many times.

For the protocol sending the message over a secure channel, Tamarin
proves all the considered lemmas. The nonce is secret from the
perspective of both the initiator and the receiver because the adversary
cannot read anything on a secure channel.  Furthermore, as the adversary
cannot send his own messages on the secure channel nor modify messages
transmitted on the channel, the receiver can be sure that the nonce was
sent by the agent who he believes to be in the initiator role.


Similarly, one can define other channels with other properties.
For example, we can model a secure channel with the additional property
that it does not allow for replay. This could be done by changing the secure
channel rules above by chaining `!Sec($A,$B,x)` to be a linear fact 
`Sec($A,$B,x)`. Consequently, this fact can only be consumed once and not be
replayed by the adversary at a later point in time.
In a similar manner, the other channel properties can be changed and additional
properties can be imagined.


Induction
---------

Tamarin's constraint solving approach is similar to a backwards search, in the
sense that it starts from later states and reasons backwards to derive
information about possible earlier states. For some properties, it is more
useful to reason forwards, by making assumptions about earlier states and
deriving conclusions about later states. To support this, Tamarin offers a
specialised inductive proof method.

We start by motivating the need for an inductive proof method on a simple example with two rules and one lemma:

~~~~ {.tamarin slice="code/InductionExample.spthy" lower=5 upper=23}
~~~~

If we try to prove this with Tamarin without using induction (comment
out the `[use_induction]` to try this) the tool will loop on the backwards
search over the repeating `A(x)` fact. This fact can have two
sources, either the `start` rule, which ends the search, or another
instantiation of the `loop` rule, which continues.

The induction method works by distinguishing the last timepoint `#i`
in the trace, as `last(#i)`, from all other timepoints. It assumes the
property holds for all other timepoints
than this one.  As these other time points must occur earlier,
this can be understood as a form of *wellfounded induction*.
The induction hypothesis then becomes an additional constraint during the
constraint solving phase and thereby allows more properties to be proven.

This is particularly useful when reasoning about action facts that must always
be preceded in traces by some other action facts. For example, induction can
help to prove that some later protocol step is always preceded by the
initialization step of the corresponding protocol role, with similar parameters.


Integrated Preprocessor {#sec:integrated-preprocessor}
-----------------------

Tamarin's integrated preprocessor can be used to include or exclude
parts of your file.  You can use this, for example, to restrict your
focus to just some subset of lemmas. This is done by putting the relevant part of
your file within an `#ifdef` block with a keyword `KEYWORD`

```
#ifdef KEYWORD
...
#endif
```

and then running Tamarin with the option `-DKEYWORD` to have this part included.

If you use this feature to exclude source lemmas, your case
distinctions will change, and you may no longer be able to construct
some proofs automatically.  Similarly, if you have `reuse` marked
lemmas that are removed, then other following lemmas may no longer be provable.


The following is an example of a lemma that will be included when `timethis` is
given as parameter to `-D`:

~~~~ {.tamarin slice="code/TimingExample.spthy" lower=20 upper=24}
~~~~

At the same time this would be excluded:

~~~~ {.tamarin slice="code/TimingExample.spthy" lower=26 upper=30}
~~~~


How to Time Proofs in Tamarin
-----------------------------

If you want to measure the time taken to verify 
a particular lemma you can use the previously described preprocessor to mark
each lemma, and only include the one you wish to time. This can be
done, for example, by  wrapping
the relevant lemma within `#ifdef timethis`. Also make sure to include
`reuse` and `sources` lemmas in this.  All other lemmas should be
covered under a different keyword; in the example here we use `nottimed`.

By running

```
time tamarin-prover -Dtimethis TimingExample.spthy --prove
```

the timing are computed for just the lemmas of interest. Here is the
complete input file, with an artificial protocol:

~~~~ {.tamarin include="code/TimingExample.spthy"}
~~~~

Configure the Number of Threads Used by Tamarin
-----------------------------------------------

Tamarin uses multi-threading to speed up the proof search. By default,
Haskell automatically counts the number of cores available on the machine
and uses the same number of threads.

Using the options of Haskell's run-time system this number can be manually 
configured. To use x threads, add the parameters

```
+RTS -Nx -RTS
```

to your Tamarin call, e.g.,

```
tamarin-prover Example.spthy --prove +RTS -N2 -RTS
```

to prove the lemmas in file `Example.spthy` using two cores.

Reasoning about Exclusivity: Facts Symbols with Injective Instances
-------------------------------------------------------------------

We say that a fact symbol `f` has *injective instances* with respect to a
multiset rewriting system `R`, if there is no reachable state of
the multiset rewriting system `R` with more than one instance of an `f`-fact
with the same term as a first argument. Injective facts typically arise from
modeling databases using linear facts. An example of a fact with injective
instances is the `Store`-fact in the following multiset rewriting system.

```
  rule CreateKey: [ Fr(handle), Fr(key) ] --> [ Store(handle, key) ]

  rule NextKey:   [ Store(handle, key) ] --> [ Store(handle, h(key)) ]

  rule DelKey:    [ Store(handle,key) ] --> []
```

When reasoning about the above multiset rewriting system, we exploit that
`Store` has injective instances to prove that after the `DelKey` rule no other
rule using the same handle can be applied. This proof uses trace induction and
the following constraint-reduction rule that exploits facts with unique
instances.

Let `f` be a fact symbol with injective instances. Let `i`, `j`, and `k` be temporal
variables ordered according to

```
  i < j < k
```

and let there be an edge from `(i,u)` to `(k,w)` for some indices `u` and `v`.
Then, we have a contradiction, if the premise `(k,w)` requires a fact `f(t,...)`
and there is a premise `(j,v)` requiring a fact `f(t,...)`.  These two premises
must be merged because the edge `(i,u) >-> (k,w)` crosses `j` and the state at
`j` therefore contains `f(t,...)`. This merging is not possible due to the
ordering constraints `i < j < k`.

Note that computing the set of fact symbols with injective instances is
undecidable in general. We therefore compute an under-approximation to this
set using the following simple heuristic. A fact tag is guaranteed to have
injective instance, if

1. the fact-symbol is linear, and
2. every introduction of such a fact is protected by a `Fr`-fact of the first term, and
3. every rule has at most one copy of this fact-tag in the conclusion and the first term arguments agree.

We exclude facts that are not copied in a rule, as they are already handled
properly by the naive backwards reasoning.

Note that this support for reasoning about exclusivity was sufficient for our
case studies, but it is likely that more complicated case studies require
additional support. For example, that fact symbols with injective instances
can be specified by the user and the soundness proof that these symbols have
injective instances is constructed explicitly using the Tamarin prover.
Please tell us, if you encounter limitations in your case studies:
https://github.com/tamarin-prover/tamarin-prover/issues.


Equation Store
--------------

Tamarin stores equations in a special form to allow delaying case splits on them.
This allows us for example to determine the shape of a signed message without case
splitting on its variants. In the GUI, you can see the equation store being
pretty printed as follows.

```
  free-substitution

  1. fresh-substitution-group
  ...
  n. fresh substitution-group
```

The free-substitution represents the equalities that hold for the free
variables in the constraint system in the usual normal form, i.e., a
substitution. The variants of a protocol rule are represented as a group of
substitutions mapping free variables of the constraint system to terms
containing only fresh variables. The different fresh-substitutions in a group
are interpreted as a disjunction.

Logically, the equation store represents expression of the form

```
      x_1 = t_free_1
    & ...
    & x_n = t_free_n
    & ( (Ex y_111 ... y_11k. x_111 = t_fresh_111 & ... & x_11m = t_fresh_11m)
      | ...
      | (Ex y_1l1 ... y_1lk. x_1l1 = t_fresh_1l1 & ... & x_1lm = t_fresh_1lm)
      )
    & ..
    & ( (Ex y_o11 ... y_o1k. x_o11 = t_fresh_o11 & ... & x_o1m = t_fresh_o1m)
      | ...
      | (Ex y_ol1 ... y_olk. x_ol1 = t_fresh_ol1 & ... & x_1lm = t_fresh_1lm)
      )
```
